PART4 

References:
BOLFARINE, H.; BUSSAB, W. O. Elementos de Amostragem. São Paulo: Blucher, 2005.
BONAFINI, C. F. Probabilidade e Estatística. São Paulo: Pearson Education do Brasil, 2015.
COCHRAN, W. G. Sampling Techniques. 3rd. edition. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1977.
FERREIRA, V. A. M. Análise Estatística. Rio de Janeiro: Estácio, 2015.
IBGE. Pesquisa anual de serviços. Notas técnicas. 1. ed. Rio de Janeiro: IBGE, 2017. Consultado em meio eletrônico em: 14 out. 2020.
JESSEN, R. J. Statistical Survey Techniques. New York: Wiley, 1978.
LARSON, R.; FABER, B. Estatística Aplicada. 4. ed. São Paulo: Pearson, 2009.
LOHR, S. Sampling: Design and Analysis. 2nd edition. California: Duxbury Press, 2010.

Cluster Sampling: 
Understand basic concept for cluster sampling by conglomerates and aspects about this select for one, two or multiple stages. Variables for interested, with the average, and total; coefficient of correlation with conglomerates; one particular case of sampling for conglomerates and systematic sampling. Propose: understand the characteristic of techniques of cluster sampling to estimate the quantity of interested on search. Presents the expressions using toe this estimate and coefficient of correlation intraclass. Present a particular case for cluster sample, in this case sistematic sampling. Preparation: Before begins this content, certified to go along examples and demonstration. Goals: module 1. apply the concept to sampling for cluster for one or more stages comparison with differents sampling plans of select unit for sample. Module 2: apply estatistic expression in estimate of quantity of interested accordig to sampling cluster include the coefficient with correlation intraclass. Module 3: describe the sampling of sistematic select for estimate sampling
Module 1: apply the concept of cluster sampling for one or more stages, comparing differents sample plans for select the units of sample.  Toe that impacts contourne this problem, can used the cluster sampling. This module analyse this type of selection to sampling of cluster. See the Advantages to do the cluster on population and hot toe that. Besides that, study the selection for sampling cluster on more than one level. Stars this level and after that the selection on multiple stages. How to create groups on sample before do this sampling. 
1. Motivation for cluster sampling: The cost of search is variable and extremely important at moment to define the stages of planning. Probabily this person who contract the serach doesn't know nothing about sample plan, methods of select, estimate or error margin. More than what he want, is save money. // This challenge is bigger in the pratical way because convince someone to do X beasied Y is cheaper but could be complicated. Because of this is important to explain and leaving the cliente choose multiple scenarios of this sampling. When you do that, from differents sampling, using differents levels of confidence G = 90% G=95% G= 99% and the error values too E= 1% E=3% E=5% Explain the impact of recult could cause to using one scenario or another. To help solve this problem with this complexicity, the cluster sampling (CS) could be useful. Another time are available refresh register to analyse units, but the investigate from unit from this population could be difficult because the same could find the dispersion in the real life, impact higher cousts to collect and wait the obtain of data. Depends of the case, the same register from this population could be definy,e and updated data. Depends of the case, the register from this population had been definied,e and updated could be higher coust to select sample among the simple random sample (SRS) or stratified sampling (SS). SRS: In this case you select from a aleatory list had been use with replacement or without replacement. It's meand any unit could be a part of the sample and the problem increase if just one element far away from each other be select. It'll coust high price to change the place to find only one quixx, that's not enough. That characteristic is undesire in simple random sample.   SS: in this one to construct natural strata or statistics but for each strata constructed you need to select one sample inside. So if have 1000 stratas, have to select a samplefor each one of 1000 stratas. If you dont have any limitation of time or budget thats ok, if this happen whcih alternative we have? At this point to get int the cluster of sample, imagine divide your population in groups but without been necessary select sample for one of this groups as AE, and you are not so depent fro randomixxed distance for each unit, as SRS. First select randomic some groups after that obtain your sample. In this way the model of cluster sampling have to do this investigate for groups of units in cluster, besides investigate in isolation every simple simple unit how occur in models with simple random and stratification sample. 
2. comparing of stratification sampling and cluster sampling:  the of the sample plan by cluster remember, in certain way, the stratification sampling. In both cases, we divide the population on sets. Once this part are the same, but the difference starts appears. 1. stratification: the stratification is more indicated when groups who are formed intern more homogeneous between each other. Means, in theory, the variability inside the strata gonna be less which means the variability among stratas been bigger (if the variability is smaller inside, she had been bigger outside). In case of SS we need guarantee the select of sample for each strata, doesn't matter how strata exists. 2. Cluster: in cluster the premise is the group formed from population had to be in the certain way similar each other, because of thta doesn't have to be different to select one group or another. The idea are sample elements have to be distributed in groups and doesn't exist individuals with characteristic more particular in just one group. Wainting the cluster select can be select for all population. That meand, more Heterogenous inside cluster more efficient for sample procedure. That's exaclty opposite required on stratification sample. According to Bolfarine (2005) when more similar are the elements inside one cluster, less efficient is the procedure. The result is expect, because the cluster have to more representative from universe, it have to be a micro representation from itself, it means the all type of participaticion, not only one type of the same way. Because of that, we said the opposite is expect from SS. Besides that the methods are divide from population groups (that means strata or cluster) the techniques are completely differents. 
3. Concept about cluster sampling: in this type of sampling, the population units are grouped in clusters. In this situations, is possible define groups among units to analyse how close they are each other. The using of this grouped as unit for sampling possibility increase how fast collect and dicrease the cost of this investigate without big loss of efficiency. // when are not available the register for unit analysed (people, home, employeeson a industry, establishment, comercial etc) the obtain and update for this register become a problem when the subject is the cost. It's possiblr the time necesary to update are longer than expect and affects surveys. Disposing from register, which this units are grouped as example: census sectors, census demographic, census economic, register from industry. survey to update this unit, agglomerated is less easir the realixxation to update sample statistics. For example: a population divide 6 groups, that means 6 conglomerates(could be 6 region) each unit inside this conglomeratesis the unit of population. In this case, the sample unit is not each element, and become as conglomerates as all of them( example: regions, states, districts, families, houses, schools). In this way each conglomerates has more than one populacional element. According to Bolfarine (2005) it features well sample planning for conglomerates and the sample unit is more then one populacional element. Step by step. step 1: in this first step using the sample plan is define the conglomerates. Need to find a characteristic allow to separate this population for any groups mutual and exclusive (distinct) and exaustive (all individual have to been insert in a group) in this way doesn't exist any different non aleatory of other groups.
4. Advantages and desadvantages of cluster sampling:  we can said the most Advantages for this method is select between operational part, implies consequentelli dicrease costs. Select conglomerates and investigate the population inside is cheaper than other methods of sampling. Example: One election search, for example, of some country with continential dimensions could be more complicated. The AC could be extremely advantage, because image doing one selection in all country. The best things is separet the population in groups and select a parte for study. Besides that, using the geographic clusters could lower costs for search. The most advantage for this type of selection is conglomerates been more homogeneous internal. That's too bad for search, because if the elements inside the cluster are so similar, the sample plan result in some problems at moment of analyses statistic, because presented increase variance. Inside the same conglomerates of unit trend have more values similar (high correlation) in respect of a lot of variables from this search. This fenomeny  trends to do more sample plan of this kindy been less efficiency. 
5. Cluster sampling in stages: at least now are you studying how to created cluster for using this sample plan. But, sample cluster are not only this. this allos how to use a lot of stages after this select. We see nos how we can do this in practical way. 
5.1 Sampling cluster in only just stage: this is a kindy of sample cluster. First of all, define the cluster and after that select the sample according to the sample plan ( simple random sample). So, first the group after select the RSR, named simple sample for cluster. For cluster select all the elements belonging to this cluster will be part of sample. In this case, we don't define the sixxe of sample, but the quantity of cluster after that select cluster for all individuals inside the interviews. In the figure 3 the population are divide in 6 groups, in 3 groups was select randomic (paint with yellow). So the moment for this was realixxed the sample cluster in stage 1 said all individual inside will be select, doesn't matter how exists. Theory in pratical way: imagine one search to estimated the familiar income of students average of determine city. Consider the sampling to cluster in one stage, which steps are using to find this result of this research? to solve this question frist divide the town in school districts. It means each district will conglomerates. Done this, we have to select some of conglomerates and ask about familiar income for each students. In that way the sample of unit is obtain select sample for conglomerates include all unit in conglomerates select ( sample cluste on 1 stage with SCS1) 
5.2 Sampling with cluster in two stages: maybe you are thinking: how to select this individuals? why not select just one? if you think about this onSC on two stages. In this case, after select a cluster, we need to select individual inside all cluster. so we dont need the sixxe for each cluster, so we can control all cost to select the search. In this figure 4 shows SC in two stages, first of all had been select with clusters (2,3 and 4) after that just some units had been select random select with SRS. Named this case sampling with cluster in two stages ou just SCS2.
5.3 Sampling with clusters on multiple stages:  this terminology are using to select data and said about unit of sampling. This first itens are using to sampling named unit to primary sampling (PS), the second one named secondary unit sampling (SUS ) the third level named tertiary unit for sampling (TUS). The sample of multiples stages are unfoldings of units selection by levels before. Imagine one schollar search in one district. First of all, one school are defined with a cluster in some of them are selected. Then, in this raffle, selection students at class, as saw in figure 5. On figure 5, first select the school will do the part of search (1 and 3) after the class from schools (class 2 at school 1 class 25 at school 3). Then, we do the select to student inside in class. So, we got: primary unit sampling(PUS): school secondary unit of Sampling(SUS): class tertiary unit of sampling(TUS): students // to summarie we got 3 stages: step1:sample of PS select Step2: select sample to SUS for each one PS select at first step. Step 3: sample of elemetary unit select from one of this TUS select. Some author using the term of elementary unit for the last level of sampling. So, in this case, students were called Elementary Unit. In this example we said 3 stages, so this have to be big for former groups. We can select statesl, after cities in this states, neighbohood, individual, houses. So we have sampling for cluster in 5 stages, and states of PS and individuais in all elementary units.   
     
