
#### Part 5
Using the R on specifiction and estion of sample plan by simple random sampling, sistematic, stratification and to cluster. Propose: Present the statistic software R and sample select the estimation of differents sample plans, and how the simple random sampling, stratification sampling, cluster sampling and sistematic sampling. Preparation install R. Module1: Describe general concepts about statistic software R and package sampling on estimations by simples random sampling. Module2: Describe the package survey to estimation by the stratification sampling. Modulo3: Select samples by sistematic sampling and conglomerates with estimation to this plans on R. 
Modulo 1: Describe general concept about statistic software R and package sampling on estimation by simple random sampling.  Intro: when construct a search and drawing a complex sample, the data analysis on papel could be unavailable. Besides that, programming all the time th same formulas wastes so much time, when have to be apply in another part of process. Because of that, learn how to select sample and estimation for any sample plans by statistic software. In case we learn how to use R program inside the sample theory. In this module we know install R software and the principa characteristic which make it the best programming and the most versatile and widespread inside the academyc field and profissional fields. Using the library series inside the software to select simple random sample we do this estimation by sample plan. 
About software R: The R software is statistic and act as alternative by traditional statistic programming, as SPSS, SAS and Stata with open code language extensible. It means the software is open and can be used by users. And it's a extremely robust, simple to use, advanced and free. It's not exist demo version after this another version comletely are for pay, but it's all for free. E each person could just contribute with your own programming projects. That's really interesting because somebody on the other side could add somenthing inside the programming and you just using this code too. How interesting using R comed increase last years, and it's probabily you have to do something there or just implements by other person who available free using. Besides that, this environment is available on Windows, mac unix and linux. Do you know this software are always refresh and the userd could just download the last version. In the old days exists just classic R, original with a plataform more oldier, but nowadays you can use a interface more friendly and simple just to use it. In the real time, install class R and after that install a interface with better framworks. The operation of R is done in packages, named library. When you install R a lot of packages comes in the memory, and it's allow to use more than one interesting functions. It's done to R save space in memory and don't be to harvy. Other softwares, when you click to open all, everything is loading automatically, it's so harvy because the environment is hard to open with a lot slow time. The R works as a different, because you just install and download everything you gonna use. 
