#####
PART 3
Using the sample stratified for specif quantity. Allocation the sample in some strata, estimator proportion and the sixx of sample necesary to that calculus. Propose: Presents this technique for estimator quantity for interest searching and do it with allocation in some of strata. Preparation: before begin this theme, use the normal distribution for table . Goals: 1. describe the method for select sample random strata and the importance to use strata and the reason for stratification. 2. define the notation for use the stratification with expression to total estimator, average and stratification variance. 3. define variables for proportion e the sixxe for sample using on this sample stratification simple with differents allocation availables.
average and total, describe the method to select samples randomic stratification, used strata and the reason for stratification. 
3.1 concepts about stratification sample: For example, you need do some sample around the country, but it need to be randon and you have to chosse 1000 people. But in this case you can choose some specific regions more than other, and another one could not apper in this search. You can solve this problem with stratification. You got 3 points: 1. you can get the specific habit in some places. 2. if you have information divide the population in part or subset ou strata to use for researching and reduce the error of sample, otherwise reduce the sixxe of sample. 3. that helps the error sample because none of group will be empty. So it's possible use some variability in this strata which helps to samples in all strata. ||| Classifications, regionalixxation, administration division in every region urban or rural. This case the subset gonne treats as strata.
Basic concepts:  stratification(the process to divide the population on subset, the way which elements of population belonging for one subset, named stratification) strata(the process which subset of population will divide and defines your strata) natural strata (when some elements of population are subdivide on subset defines by geographic criterial, political lines, class, categories, named natural strata. The Classification of this industry, the line betweenil or another federation unit, the separate of population, as a occasion on that place on urban or rural population are examples of strata). Statistics strata ( are defined by Statistic or searching of this area to define some strata as subset more homogeneous of population. The idea is increase the estimation efficienc. When this elements of population are reunit on subset are defined on function of dimension from one variable X, as a possibilitie to increase with precision  this sample, or reduce this sixxe on subset constitute stratas of sixxe, for example. That classification of industry as some industry tracks or classification of establishments agricultural on function of this area for example of strata of sixxe.) 
3.2 Example for searching using this stratification: On pratical way we dont used the stratification, but we have natural strata and the sixxe at the same time. It's commom to used this definition on set to increase more the quality of search. Example Brasilian Intitute of Geography and Statistic, are using two types of strata: the natural and final.
3.2.1 Natural is the combination the economyc activities of companies, and construct for a specific Statistic stata.  
3.2. 2  Advantages of stratas samples: the best precision of estimated: thats stratification could be more precise. If you compare the stratification samples (SS) with simple random sample (SRS) isnot necesary less error. Using simple strata don't produce a efficient more than (SRS). But if you do the the right strata you could descrease variance of estimator. That result is possible for less sample, and less budge, and don't forget the less variability.
3.2. 3 Ensure the note of samples in created stratas: defined data from stratas you need select the samples for each one independent, so any strata could be empty. That selection is done independent and the strata are mutual exclusionary, thats means one person couldn't stay at mutual groups or strata at the same time. 
3.2. 4  Allows estimator for each population group from search: one of Advantages for stratification search is the estimates for each strata are for created by search groups. || We can estimated for each strata how it's necesary for differents  strata. As independent of strata, you can estimate for independent form too. You can do the estimator of the total from one strata and the average for another, for example. 
3.2.5 that could be operationally convenience: for every search were doing by SRS when the sample are randomixxed  for that populatio. stratification could limits our interest, which will simplify collect. First of all, to spend descrease, not only only place of unit, but a lot of individual by strata.
3.3 Disadvantages of simple random: not everything are flowers, not only positive points on the sample stratified from sample error. Need this: knowledge for variables from stratified for all unit in register befores sample. ( all companies need a unit for federation, economyc activities and quantity for employees. First of all using this variable of unit from this federation and economic select this enterprise which will be a part of sample and after that quantity the number of employees to distribute all strata sample). 2. Divide the population at many stratified could exists tiny samples at any strata. 
To define all stratas you have tho check the register, if it has all individuals enough to select, it couldn't estimate the variance, and the estimation of total need to be limits. We got in this 1 strata 4 enterprise, but just one answer. Notice the quantity of information avaiables on this strata. We can't calculte the variance, because it exists just one enterprise, thats happens because we concetrate our result in just one enterprise. What you do? Run to enterprises which doesn't replied to reverse the non-collect thats information, or define better how this strata to be bigger than 4 enterprise.
3.4  reason for stratified: 
3.4.1 the desire to increase the precision for estimated given by a variability from interest characteristic could be big. Thats better from precision from estimate be reduce by variance from estimators after construct strata. 2. ensure this disclosure from information to each domain from interest or estiamte the estimates for segments by population. Fix each strata, or be better control for errors. 3. that strata form natural groupt for interest. People who lives in region could had life habit  for differents regions. So this strata has studies object. 4. replicate the sample of same composition from population based on specif characteristic. If we knoe the composed by population was based on 52% of women, and 48% men, beside thats 10% have superior graduated, 50% high school and 40% basic school we can created this samples exaclty the same distribution. The sample will created with proportion variable by population.
3.4.2 spread the sample of population. As all strata have the select sample, this process of stratification automatically spread the sample for each one of thie sample groups.
4. efficiency criterion: to gain efficiency with the stratification, the idea will change values from variable from studies from each strata to similar or homogeneous as possible, it means minixxe the variance inside the stratas. The stratification idea  is create stratas for been similar. Which means the variance inside of stratas will be smaller variance among the upper stratas. For this happens it's fundamental been acess to register with variable to use stratification the population as efficiency way. In this way minixxe the variability intrastrata and maximixxe the variance of strata. 
5. General method: partition the population U on H subset mutual exclusive e exaustive named strata. Two event named mutual exclusive, when they doens't occur at the same time. When you play one coin, that event could be heads or tails but never both at the same time. This exaustive term said the fact that category is only one unit sample. So, this samples have to stay in just one strata, or all the strata and have shows in all samples. In math notation we got the represent of strata named Uh, so: U1,...Uh,.... UH, this way U= U1 ∪ U2 ∪... ∪ Uh = ∪  H h=1 Uh and Uh ∩ Uk =  Ø, h≠ k. That means Nh, the sixxe Uh so N1+ N2+... + Nh= N || After that that population stratas we can select samples sh from sixxe Nh with Nh> 0 , according the natural select independent inside every strata h , when h=1,2,...H and ΣH h=1 nh= n So this way are secure to strata have your population represents on the final sample, because s=s1 ∪ s2 ∪  sh 
6. Simple stratified sample: SS is a method to element of population are divided by groups named strata. So, let's suposed a group have to do a search in industry at some region, we got two type red and blue. Red are almost of them. after this the stratas 1 and 2 we could select the sample to represent exactly that population proportion. if we got 2/3 red, 1/3 blue we can select one of each stratas at the same proportion. So, if our sample were sixxe 9, we have 6 red and 3 blue. But how we select this companies inside of the stratas. In this case we have the simple random sample. Step by step: 1. the simple random sample (SRS) we do this random select for each element for equal probability for drawn for sample, it's select independent each other. 2. it means that random procedure, drawn equals probability for population elements. This way, the simple random sample is gonna take for each strata for represent, by the way it could possibility better estimate for population.     
examples: exists a lot of methods to select sample of data. The sample plan named sample stratified means: divide population on subset of units, and select the sample inside on of subset, but each select independent from each other. That definition of stratified of sample is divide some population on subset named strata, as name, gender, salary, region. After that select samples for each sample on this subset. So, that select in each strata have to be independent from each other. 
example2: For this stratified sample the population are divided by stratas from selection and each strata are construct for a possible variability estimated. This measure are variable to obtain among strata and inside of strata. For this variability we can affirm: In this stratified sampling, the variance inside this stratas have to be smaller, and the variance have to stay among stratas have to be bigger. || On this theory the stratified sampling, the population have to divide each strata, so inside the strata the populationhave to be homogeneous. This idea is created eahc groups in the population unit similar, that means, share habits, opinions, similar mores. So, the variability inside stratas is smaller, the variance among stratas have to be bigger. Than, if the variability intrastrata have to be smaller, while the variability among regions is bigger.
PART 3.1
Define the notation using to stratified, with expression in total estimation, average and variance for stratification sampling.
On this module, let's do estimation of variables for sample allocation using stratified. First, undertsand the concept of sample weight the notation and basic definition, after that use math expressions to do estimate for sampling theory. Then, distribute the select sampl for strata to specif sample allocation. 
1. sample weight: this concept is the base for sample plan, which is the idea for sample weight. The weight represent the population unit. When do some sample, adjust part of poulation which will analyse, and the sample result gonna be compatible and need to adjust the result for population. The sample weight represents the number of unit from population. Sample weight represent the number of units from population which will be represents for that specif unit from sample. 
Example1:  
